I think the world of Peter.
He's stimulating to talk to him because, you know, some people, when you talk to him, it's like hitting a tennis ball against a rug hung on a rope, you know.
Nothing happens.
When you talk with Peter, boy, it comes back to you, you know.
It's lots of bounce and fun.
You know, I have like a kind of a scripted interview, but right off the bat when you were talking to the teachers and you were mentioning how your work in progress is about 1776, I wonder how influential was Thomas Paine in 1776 and the Declaration of Independence, the reading of him?
Well, Paine's importance can't really be overemphasized.
His importance is phenomenal.
It was, I guess,
hands down, our first bestseller, Common Sense.
And it wasn't just the numbers of people who read it, but who read it and who was influenced by it, including Washington.
Many people were holding back about independence until Common Sense came along.
And it was still touch and go right up until July of that summer of whether Congress would vote to declare independence.
But had there been no book common sense, I don't think it would have happened.
Not that summer, anyway.
And probably wouldn't have happened at all because the fortunes of wars went so against us after that summer of 76, all through the rest of the year.
It's very doubtful Congress would have ever done anything so rash as declare independence.
But this is an instance of where a book... Oh, the book changed history, no question about it.
As did Wealth of Nations, also published the same year.
It was a big year for books.
If you take those three books, Common Sense, Wealth of the Nations, and Gibbon's Decline and Fall of Rome, and then talk about knowing a person by knowing their reading.
Yes.
And interestingly, Gibbon makes comments on the war in America as it proceeds.
And talk about the historian misreading the events of his time.
He sure did, which is very interesting.
I think that Paine also, it should be also understood that Paine was with the army.
in the darkest time when they were retreating across New Jersey toward the Delaware and eventually getting across on the Pennsylvania side.
And that's when he wrote, in the Crisis, These are the Times, the Tri-Men's Souls, which is, needless to say, one of the great lines ever written.
And wasn't that published first anonymously, I think?
No, Common Sense was, yes.
Common Sense was, yes.
And many people thought John Adams had written it, or they thought either Adams or Benjamin Franklin had written it.
We're running well.
This is such a wonderful lecture that you gave, and I've read it a number of times.
Thank you.
And that's how I knew, by the way, why I paint.
I didn't know that.
I knew it from you.
And I guess the good life of the mind, when you talk about entering the life and the mind of someone who lived 200 years ago, obviously you have this treasure trove of correspondence and
and journals, and papers here, and archival documents.
How important, however, is the reading, the books?
You describe Adams as perhaps the best-read person of his era, and I'm assuming when you say that you're ranking him above Jefferson and Franklin.
I do.
I do rank him above Jefferson and Franklin.
Jefferson is a very close second, I would say.
His reading was not only broader, it was deeper.
Now, Jefferson is a very great man and a very great intellect, to say the least, and I'm by no means putting Jefferson down.
I just want to put Adams where I think he belongs as a book man.
And he was more eclectic than Jefferson, and his reading was more passionate as he was, more passionate kind of person.
I think we are what we read to a very large degree, or certainly to a larger degree than you're willing to admit.
There was a famous book years ago called You Are What You Eat.
Well, sure, we are what we eat, I guess, but we are what we read.
And I don't think it's easy or even possible to understand any particular generation or certainly that generation of the founders without reading what they read.
When Jefferson sat down to write the Declaration of Independence, he acknowledged that there was nothing new in what he was saying, that everything he was saying in the Declaration of Independence, he'd taken from what he had read.
And that's true, and literally true.
And his sense, as so many of the people of the 19th century felt, that
the world of the mind was to be found in books.
Ideas were to be found in books.
And people, and that there was nothing one could not learn.
Two of the most interesting figures in the book that I'm working on now, Nathaniel Green and Henry Knox, became high-ranking officers at the very start of the Revolutionary War,
not having had any experience in the military, none.
All that they knew, all that they knew about being an officer, about armament, about drill, about military tactics and strategy, they had gotten from books.
They'd never set foot on a battlefield.
They'd never seen a war, let alone fought in one.
All they knew was what they
had read in books.
But they lived in a time when that was not considered an unusual way to learn something.
That was a very good way to learn something, that through a close study of books there was no limit to what one could learn.
And Nathaniel Green was made a general when he was 33 years old.
He was a general and had never commanded any troops of any kind
and had never seen warfare firsthand, or had any schooling in warfare.
None.
And he turned out to be the best general we had.
By the end of the war, I think one can safely quite fairly say that Nathaniel Green was the most brilliant general we had.
And have people then gone to examine the books that he read?
Oh, sure.
Very well know what he read.
He tells you what he read.
And he was taken, sort of taken under his wing,
by Ezra Stiles, who was a... Nathaniel Green came from Rhode Island, a little town of Greenwich, Rhode Island.
And Ezra Stiles liked this young man and started to guide him in his reading.
Well, Ezra Stiles subsequently became, not very long after that, the president of Yale University.
So this sort of kindly neighborhood friend, as it were,
turns out to be one of the leading intellects of the time.
So Nathaniel Green was very lucky.
He also could afford the books because he had enough money to buy them.
And he would come up to Boston to go to Henry Knox's bookstore.
Henry Knox had the London bookshop.
He was a bookseller.
And part of his stock and trade were military books published mostly in England.
And Green could afford those books because he had sufficient
funds and he would talk with his friend the bookseller Knox about military matters and other matters and they became quite good friends Knox too became Washington's head of all the artillery in his 20s and all he'd ever known was what he'd read in books now it's hugely to Washington's credit it seems to me that he spotted this talent these two young men and gave them their head as leaders
But, of course, Washington himself was an uneducated man, formally.
Uneducated.
He had very little formal education, not even completing what we might call grade school.
He did not know Latin or Greek, as any educated man of the time did.
And so I'm sure he saw some of himself in these two young men.
And he read the same books.
military treatises as these two did.
So part of the language of the profession, if you will, that they had in common were the books they'd read.
So we are not only what we read, we are in association with others who have read the same thing.
That is a common bond that can develop between people.
Book clubs today are two people who each have a
huge fondness for a particular book, and they get together, and they say, yes, we have that in common.
His question, is it safe to assume that the opposing generals are reading the same books?
Yes.
Absolutely.
So does one neutralize the other?
Wasn't it said of Grant that maybe one of the reasons he was so successful was that he was last in class, or maybe he hadn't been reading the books that everyone else had been reading?
I hate to jump around in centuries.
Well, of course, it all depends on who's reading the book.
And our
Our generals, our military leaders, were amateurs compared to the British.
British officers were very good officers, by and large.
Now, they made some big mistakes, and their overall strategy was not so good.
But they ran rings around us for the first years or more, and it wasn't really until the horrendous defeat of
Burgoyne at Saratoga that the odds began to turn that maybe we didn't have a chance.
But we were, we had a lot in common with those people that we were fighting.
It wasn't just that they spoke the same language, or in many cases the same genetic stock.
I mean,
John Adams was an Englishman.
That's his entire background.
Genetically, he was all English.
He was as English as anybody could be, though he'd never set foot in England until later on.
But they read the same things.
The novels that our people of that time, the leaders of the Revolution, and those who weren't in favor of the Revolution, they all read the same novels that the Englishmen read.
They were English novels.
There were no books published here.
No, of course not.
And Henry Knox's book is the London Bookshop.
It's the best that you could buy.
You can see the earlier selection of 100 books influential in America prior to 1900.
It's the Farmer's Almanac.
It's the Montgomery Wart catalog, which predates the Sirs Roebuck catalog.
I mean, it's very utilitarian things.
There are a few items, obviously, but when we go for our entertainment and inspiration,
We go to farm books.
Obviously, we have notable exceptions with Mark Twain and Hawthorne and the others, but books at that point were really how to tell you how to grow things on the farm.
I think next to the Bible, the Farmers' Almanac was number two in Holmes.
There are figures.
I'm sure.
Let's just kind of back up entirely to what you were just saying.
Leon E. Dowell wrote a little book about Henry James' library.
You talk about the fabulous literary biographies that he wrote about James.
He did one little monograph.
but how essential it was for him to know the reading of Henry James, the books, to go to the library.
And I wonder how important it is for you.
I mean, again, you have this fabulous resource here at the Historical Society, but how important also is it to have access not only to Adams' books, but to the wonderful, apparently, marginalia and annotations of these books.
Oh, infinitely valuable.
John Adams was a disputatious sort of fellow.
And he liked to stir the waters and rock the boat a little bit and argue.
He made his career, his fame, as a court attorney.
He was the best courtroom attorney in the Commonwealth, in the process at that time.
And he would argue with the author that he was reading.
And he loved to read authors whose opinions were different from his.
There's a book in the Boston Public Library, which I hope we'll see this afternoon.
I think it's almost as if he wrote more in the margins than the author wrote in the book.
And they're sometimes quite funny, and they're sometimes quite pertinent, and sometimes, in my view, quite convincing.
He was ambitious.
An ambitious reader.
There was nothing he would not undertake.
I think he was 80 years old when he undertook to read a 16-volume French history in French.
You mentioned that.
Yes.
And his wife at the time, Abigail, wrote at the time, I think, as I remember, to John Quincy saying, I think the last passion that will leave your father is his love of books.
And I quote that in the book, so if I've got it wrong now, it's in there accurately.
But to a degree, of course, a lawyer in that day, and still, a lawyer had to have a library.
An attorney was the mark of a professional man in the law to have a library.
And it was also the mark of a gentleman to have a library.
A gentleman was a gentleman in part because he had a library.
And it's called the Gentleman's Library.
Yes.
And it was, of course, to a degree a measure of affluence because books were expensive.
But it was also a measure of taste and interest.
And as a fellow who grew up on a farm whose mother was almost certainly illiterate to rise in
station in life where he not only had an education but had a library and could converse about books with his comparable associates in the law or in the life of the community was a sign of opportunity, the land of opportunity.
There's no end to his
his journey of the mind and the soul.
And a lot of that is in what he's reading.
And there's no end to his growth, his evolving, nor his love of life.
And his love of the language, that wonderful letter he wrote to his son, John Quincy, when the boy was
a student at the University of Leiden in the Netherlands, just down the road from where he was living, John Adams was living in Amsterdam.
And he said, of course you must read Cicero and Thucydides and Tacitus and so forth, but don't forget the writers in your own language and the poets in your own language.
And wherever you go, take a book with you.
And then he writes that, absolutely.
fabulous line.
You'll never be alone with a poet in your pocket.
I saw that line.
I have it here in my notes.
And that is unfortunately, sadly, not something that you will see urged today.
Well, it ought to be flying on a banner atop of every library, you know.
It's just a great expression of what matters.
And then the other letter I dearly love is the letter where he writes from France to his family explaining why
why he's doing this, why he's staying away from his family, neglecting his responsibilities as a father and a provider for their wherewithal and their education.
And he writes that I must study politics and war so that my sons can study finance and naval architecture and so forth, so that their children can study poetry and painting and music.
He sees that as the upward climb.
That's progress to his mind.
And that's why I think it's so important for people to understand what did they mean in that time when they talked about the pursuit of happiness.
Happiness for John Adams was in books.
You mentioned a number of facts, and I just do love it.
I would like a few quotes on it.
These quotes from Joseph Addison.
Yeah.
You have discerned it in Hale and George Washington.
Adams, you say, Washington used it four times.
He's known to have seen the play performed seven times.
Well, I have to check that.
He read it many times, and he saw it many times.
He quoted it on numerous occasions.
And you said they didn't have to make the attribution.
They didn't have to use quotation marks.
It was understood that you knew this.
But I had no idea that Addison was so...
well-read over here on the college.
Oh, yeah.
It was the most popular play here by far.
Now, many people had never seen the play before.
The Virginians all loved the theater.
That was part of the social life there.
Washington adored the theater.
He went to see Hamlet several times.
He would go to the theater at every chance.
He went to New York at one point.
I think he went to the theater every night.
The two things about Washington I think are a window into him that
make him anything but the marble man.
One of them is his love of the theater.
We never hear about this.
No.
And the other is he was passionate interior decorator.
Who knew?
Yeah.
He loved architecture and landscape architecture.
Monticello was entirely his creation.
I don't mean Mount Vernon.
Is entirely his creation.
He picked every paint color.
He picked the embroidery on the drapery, the rugs, the kind of floor that would be put down, everything.
And if it was wrong, he would get rid of it.
And he would write to London these long letters specifying exactly what he wanted now to be, this color, this, and so forth.
And appearances are very important to him.
His uniform, how he looks, because he felt that that was part of leadership.
which is a perfectly interesting point of view, perfectly legitimate.
I don't want to cover things that you've covered elsewhere.
I thought that lecture that you gave at the Book Festival and the Vignette Gazette happily re-printed out a couple weeks ago, and I've annotated it, and I'm confident that I can quote from that.
You can take anything you want, absolutely.
But I find that, you know, you mentioned Margaret Leach's Reveille in Washington.
Yes.
I adore that.
You had a wonderful quote there that I would just ask you to expand on a bit.
You mentioned at the National Book, you assert that history, biography, poetry, fiction are not disconnected.
When we see these lists of the most influential books of our time, they reportedly leave out works of the imagination.
It's almost like
Harry Peter Stowe didn't matter.
Right.
And you mentioned Pilgrim's Progress, which is read by everyone.
Yes.
Or utopia by Thomas Ford.
And the Bible.
You know, nobody reads the Bible today.
Well, if you can, I really believe, you cannot understand those people.
I'm interviewing Elaine Pagels this Friday.
Unless you know the Bible.
I'm requesting for you people to read the Bible today.
You simply can't understand.
Hi, Rachel.
Do you have anything you need?
Everything we need.
Okay.
How are you?
I'm good.
Good.
Good to see you.
This is Nick.
Mr. Basbanes.
Nick Basbanes.
Hello.
Rachel Weiss.
Rachel's the daughter of one of my dearest friends.
Huh?
One of the best guys I ever knew.
Ed Weiss.
Oh.
Yeah.
Oh, he always will.
So will you.
Yeah.
All right.
Thank you.
Thank you so much for talking about reading the Bible.
Yeah.
I guess the original question... And the language of the Bible.
When they took the prayer out of the schools, I understand why they did that.
But I don't think any harm was done by saying the Lord's Prayer in the schools.
And when I went to school, the teacher read a passage from the Bible every morning.
It was always from the Old Testament.
And this is public school?
Public school.
And I think that just listening to that use of the English language, the poetry of it.
She was reading poetry to us every morning.
Beautiful poetry.
And it stuck.
When I was a child, I spake of this book.
Child, you know, she read that one again and again because she was trying to get us to grow up, shape up.
What do you make of it?
Oh, you found it.
Oh, aren't you wonderful.
Thank you so much.
Are you looking for the Henrietta and Wilson?
No.
Somebody else was there.
Thank you.
You mentioned the staff, I beg you.
Oh, fantastic.
Fantastic.
And I had to smile when you're talking about footnotes because my first book, I just wrote as a muse, directed me.
And of course, that book took me eight years to write and to go back into mine.
Not to write, but to do all the work on it and to find where in the world that I get this quote, you know?
Yeah.
You remember when you're a kid and you're trying to ride a bike and somebody else would put a stick in between the spokes?
That's the way I feel it would be if you stopped and tried to do your source notes.
You wouldn't go anywhere.
Stick in the...
You don't write on a computer, though, do you?
No, I write on a typewriter.
I write on a manual typewriter.
And I do kind of insert the little sources.
I'm doing it just in reg, and then I found that it's just... Well, maybe when I figure out what do I want to do with my life, I'll learn to do sort of stuff.
Let's jump over briefly, if you can, to Harry Truman.
What can we say about him and his... Well, certainly he's a beautiful example of an unlettered man
who never stopped reading.
Do you know he was a Baker Speed irregular?
No, I did not know that.
I did not know that.
Not many people do.
I know Bess loved mysteries.
When he was retired, they used to go to the library, and she would come out with an armload of mysteries.
It's said that he and his man that became the press secretary, him pulling a blank,
who was the smartest boy in the class, they decided they were going to read every book in the Independence Public Library.
Well, the Independence Public Library was very small, and nonetheless, it probably had several hundred books, and they may have read them all, but they certainly claimed they did, and they took that on, and that was an ambitious thing to do.
Truman loved history and biography, and that's mostly what he read.
I'm not sure he ever read a novel.
I don't know that he read a novel.
He certainly never talked about one that I know of.
Unlike Adams, to him, a book was very precious.
He didn't even like to fold down the corner of a page to mark where he'd stopped reading because that would damage the book.
This is Adams.
No.
This is Truman.
No, Adams writes in the margins and everything.
Yeah.
All of them.
Truman did not acquire a great library.
He loved the work of Douglas Southall Friedman, the biographer of Lee and Lee's lieutenants, and the biographer of George Washington.
He was very fond of those books, and he never stopped reading, nor did Kennedy, nor did
Heaven knows Jefferson.
Or Clinton.
And the present president, contrary to what everybody says, does read books, reads quite a lot of books, and is very interested in history and biography.
And so does his father.
And I know his father better than I know the present president.
And he always tells me what he's reading.
and what he enjoyed, what he particularly admires.
It's an interesting, you don't mind my jumping around?
No, no.
But one of the things that stuck in my head when I was thinking about this book, you talk about writing about what you know.
People say to me, why do I keep writing books about books?
I know this subject.
When Bill Clinton was leaving office three and a half years ago, someone from the New York Times asked him, what one piece of advice would you give to your successor?
And he said,
I would strongly urge him to read David Herbert Donald's biography of Abraham Lincoln.
And I just wonder, I'm going to ask Professor Donald this question as well, but what do you think Clinton wanted President Bush to derive from his biography?
In the absence of my being unable to answer that question.
I think he probably wanted him to realize how
difficult it is to be president of the United States.
The more I know about the presidency, the more I know people who have been or are president, the more understanding I feel about how hard that job is.
There is no one human being that can handle that job, no matter how much they protest to the contrary.
Imagine trying to go to sleep at night with all the worries that any president has.
And I think it's a miracle, really, that any of them have had time to sit down and read a book to take their mind off their immediate problems.
And my guess is that he also wanted to
President Bush to have a sense of how heavy the burden has been in times past.
Truman probably knew more about the presidency from having read books about the presidency than any president up to his time.
Really?
Absolutely.
And I think that the value of reading for people in high public positions of reading history is they get a sense of cause and effect.
And they get a sense, I would hope, that what we don't do is often as important as what we do in positions of great responsibility.
Very few people give Eisenhower credit for not going into Vietnam, for example.
Well, that was an extremely important decision.
Because we often decide what not to do as well as what we do.
And presidents do it all the time.
What you got?
No, somebody else wanted that.
Okay.
Maybe Peter.
Maybe Peter wanted it.
Okay.
Pretty nice.
Let's see it.
Oh, look at that.
Wow.
Isn't that wonderful?
Yeah, we just brought the Henry Adams Library back.
This place is so amazing.
and discovery, and look at the stuff that's inside.
Henry B. Adams.
Look at that.
And it's been red, too, hasn't it?
Yeah.
Very important, isn't it?
Oh, yes.
You've given me a photo op.
We're talking about Truman and his reading.
And by the way, let me know when... I think that the...
The value of history and biography and literature for a president, as it is for all of us, is that they get a much stronger sense that their decisions, what they're doing, matters in the long run, not just the short run.
That they are a link in a very long chain.
And there's only one link.
And the chain goes way back, and it's going to go way forward.
And the world didn't begin and isn't going to end.
in our time and or in his that particular president's time in office and therefore try as best you can not to make your decisions based on is it going to give me a bounce in the polls on tuesday but how will it stand the test of time how will it hold how will it look 10 years from now or 50 years or 150 years from now to me when adam's
when Adams chooses not to go to war with France, this spectacular example of a president choosing not to do something, when it would have been hugely advantageous to his political career and would have gained him all kinds of popularity and adulation, which he'd never had and which he wanted as any human being would.
But he had the backbone to not go that way.
When we were talking casually out in the other room this morning, I mentioned your reference to Lincoln and Grace Elegy.
Yes.
And you memorized it.
Well, I once knew it.
But the important passage is, let not ambition mock their useful toil, their homely joys and destiny obscure, nor grandeur here with disdainful smile the short and simple annals of the poor.
And then there's the great line, the paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Now that's, you know, if you know that Lincoln loved that poem, you understand that this, Lincoln had a very dark view of life, a very, he was very often very melancholy, very town blue.
And that comes from, and of course he comes out of the short and simple channels of the poor.
He is of that world.
And he loved the poetry of the language.
What's so interesting about Lincoln is that phenomenal gift of using language doesn't show until he becomes president.
That's extraordinary.
It is.
There's no prior... To what do you attribute this?
Rising to the occasion.
We never know what we can do.
And you can never predict who's going to be a great president.
There is no curriculum vitae that will give us, this guy's going to be a superb president.
It doesn't matter.
If your resume was the blueprint for your presidency or the guarantee that Herbert Hoover would have been easily one of the best presidents we ever had.
He had a fabulous life.
He was good at everything he'd ever done.
He was a superb executive, a great American, but he was the wrong man for the time.
Harry Truman, who would have ever thought that he would, in retrospect, be seen as one of the stronger, more effective, and important presidents of all?
And we shouldn't forget, you know, this wonderful attention that has come to John Adams because of you.
Well, that's what you've done.
Thank you.
And it's really one of the great services that has been done in public.
But, Nick, I didn't do it.
It's all there.
It's like Michelangelo said the statue's there.
Well, true.
To me, it'd be more like I found the cave with the treasures in it.
Now, the cave's been there all the time.
Okay.
Too many people were repeating what other historians had said, and the other historians really hadn't bothered to go and really look at what this man was like.
You see, I think you have to know what they were like.
What were they like as a human being?
The whole of history to me is about two mysteries.
The mystery of time and the mystery of personality or human nature.
And they are endlessly interesting.
What is the past?
What is the present?
What is the future?
What is this reality that we live in called time?
What is long ago?
If you've lost someone you love and that person's been dead for five years, that's long ago.
That's a long time ago.
If you're talking about human history, where they're pushing it back now, habitation in this continent, something like 16,000 years.
I had a professor of geology at the college who asked us, I've never forgotten this.
He said, imagine the Empire State Building.
And on top of the Empire State Building, there's a Bible lying on its side, lying at the top.
And on top of the Bible, there's a penny.
The Empire State Building is geological history.
The Bible is life on Earth.
The penny is human life on Earth.
And I think what history does is it helps us to see things in proportion.
It helps us to see things in proportion, gives us a sense of proportion, sense of proportion.
and it's an extension of the experience of being alive it just as art is or music is or poetry can be or literature i have to read so much just to know enough to do the work i'm trying to do that when i take time out to read for pleasure i very rarely read history or biography that to me would be just
practicing my trade even when I'm supposed to be changing my thoughts.
So I read, I read poetry and fiction and drama.
I love Elmore Leonard like you do.
Oh yeah, wonderful.
Just wonderful.
Well I was reading over that transcript of the talk I gave in Washington and boy I left a lot of books out of there.
But I've had the nicest calls.
I had a wonderful call from a... You left a lot of books out, you said.
Oh, yeah, but I should have mentioned it.
A wonderful call from an old friend who said, I didn't know you loved Jan de Hartog, the captain.
And he was in World War II.
And he said, that's the best book ever written about the war at sea, you know.
And de Hartog was a wonderful writer.
Oh, my God, what a writer.
I adored that picture.
The Cruel Sea.
What a wonderful book.
So when do you read for pleasure?
At night?
Night, weekends.
And do you immerse yourself?
I read all the time.
Are you able to let the other stuff go for this?
Yes.
And I read... I love mysteries.
I love good mysteries.
I think some of the mystery writers, like some historians and biographers, ought to be perceived as writing literature, not just writing...
history and biography and mysteries.
I think P.D.
James is a first-rate novelist.
First-rate novelist.
So is Ruth Rendell.
These are terrific novelists.
And they use the mystery form.
I love letters, books of letters, and I love autobiographies.
I just read a little book that Robert McNeil wrote, The McNeil of McNeil Lair.
called Wordstruck.
Have you read that book?
No.
Oh, Nick, it's just great.
It's about his love of reading and love of the language.
Is that right?
And about growing up in Halifax during the war, and his father, who fought in the war, was, I think, the destroyer captain.
Wonderful book.
Published in the 1980s.
I picked it up in a little, you know, out-of-print bookshop.
And somebody said, maybe you know who it was, that
Even the oldest book is new to him who opens it for the first time.
I don't know.
I saw it on a placard outside the library.
I tried to find that for you.
Yeah.
It's not easy.
I'm working hard.
Tell me, by the way, what our time restrictions are.
I don't know.
I think we're being fed.
Okay.
But if it's okay with you, I'll write this up.
Would you like to see this before?
No, no.
No, no, no.
No, that's, I don't, no.
I trust you totally.
Because I'm...
The only thing I would say, if you have any questions or anything you want to pursue, just call me up on the phone.
You don't mind my picking up on a few things?
Not you, not this.
This is just fabulous.
And given, of course, we have to have a comment on given.
Oh, there's one of my favorite books.
His autobiography.
I would bet I've read that, I bet I've read it three times, easily.
Because he tells us exactly how he read it.
Oh, wonderful.
Again, the use of the language.
And that scene where he's finished,
And he comes out, and he sees that there are leaves on the trees, and realizes that he's been in a spell.
He's been lost in the work.
I adore that book.
If you had one burning question that you would ask John Adams, what would it be?
Nobody alive knows him better than you, but I'm wondering.
I usually ask people what they'd ask Shakespeare if they had the chance, but I think in your instance, maybe, you know.
Okay.
I'm sorry, curveball.
I'm often asked if I could spend an hour with anybody or if I could have somebody as my friend and we drive across the country together.
Who would I pick?
Would it be?
Yeah, would be.
What would I ask?
Well, what would you open with, I wonder?
I usually think it's the one hour because that's what I usually get for an interview.
I guess I would like to have him tell me much more about his mother and father and growing up out there.
And what were these formative years like?
If the mother was in fact illiterate, as you believe she was, do you think this in any way impacted the way he developed?
Maybe he wanted, maybe it was so, you say he went to Harvard, discovered books and read for... Well, there's a passage in my book, which is from a letter of his,
where I think he saw in his mother some of his own eccentricities, his capacity to flare up, lose his temper, and so forth.
And then she sees that he really isn't cut out to be a preacher, a minister.
So my guess is that he saw a lot of himself in her, some of which he may not have liked, but I think he also knew that she understood him.
There has been a theory that he didn't like her because there are no letters to her.
Well, she can't read.
That's pretty obvious, yeah.
You know, if you get that.
I mean, Alexander the Great wrote to his mother they could both read.
They're very simple things.
You know, the visitors to the encamped soldiers around Boston during the siege of Boston, both Americans and the Brits, are astounded how dirty these men are.
Well, they're dirty because they're out digging
trenches and making breastworks and fortifications all day long.
They're dirty because they're working in the dirt with their hands.
And you have to understand the reality.
Would you do my wife and myself?
Oh, I sure will.
Connie, and she, if anyone can claim to be... And what is her name?
Connie, C-O-N-N-I-E.
If anyone can claim to be more than me to be your greatest fan, it's my wife, I have to say.
This is on tape, because this is important for me.
This is the fourth interview you and I have had.
I remember them, of course, but our first one, before I was even a book editor, was when Path Between the Seas came out on the telephone, and then I came to visit you at your home, you graciously, and I saw that old iron side, the .44 guns in your wall, and I went out and got three copies of that, and I had one of my father-in-law's houses, and my father-in-law's houses.
So that was the 70s, and then we spoke again in the 80s on Teddy Roosevelt, and then we spoke in the 90s on Harry Truman, and here we are in the fourth decade talking about other things.
And so I think of the many, many, many interviews I've done with authors over the years.
Thank you.
You're the first one to spend four decades, and every decade, and by far the best for me.
And a model for what I try to do in my own work, may I say.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
If I can even approach what you do as a writer of narrative nonfiction.
You do wonderful work in book publishing and authorship in your work.
And if you don't mind, just a little one on that.
This is a gem, I have to say.
Thank you.
I've had nice... You can see I've handled it.
I apologize.
All these notes in here, by the way, are my wife.
She's always marking things at Philip Conn, page 618.
That's her writing.
Books, libraries.
Oh, this is great.
This has been very stimulating, sir.
Thank you.
I can claim...
means it more to me, I think, than almost anything else about my work, is that all my books, none of my books has ever been out of print.
Is that fabulous?
It is.
Over almost 40 years.
Johnstown Flood was published in 1968, so it was 36 years.
And the byline of that is David G. McCullough, by the way.
I know.
I dropped the G. Yeah, you dropped the D. I have a first edition of that, in fact.
I'm pleased to say.
And there's a young fellow on the back cover that bears a slight resemblance.
This has been great.
Thank you.
Very nice.